- On October 23rd, 2018,
thousands of football
fans were making their way
to the game in Rome.
Excitement for the game was high,
and the fans began to chant and sing.
At 7:03 pm,
around 50 people were
riding the long escalator
down to the platform,
but within 30 seconds,
the crowd had swelled
to nearly double that.
Everything seemed fine,
but inside the escalator was a problem.
The weight of the passengers
was bearing down on the steps,
and the load on the main
motor was increasing.
To try to slow the descent,
the motor applied a counter torque.
But as the force continued to increase,
the stairs began to move faster.
By 7:04 pm, the crowd had tripled.
The motor finally reached its limit,
and under the massive strain,
the drum began to slip.
With the motor losing control,
the escalator triggered
its second line of defense.
A safety relay tripped,
immediately cutting power to the motor.
The main brake clamped
down on the metal drum
to stop the descent of the stairs,
but, it failed.
The friction on the
main drum wasn't enough
to stop the motor from spinning,
and the stairs continued to accelerate.
Sensing the motor had
lost control of the steps,
the escalator engaged
the last line of defense.
In the event of an emergency,
an auxiliary break is designed
to bypass the motor entirely
and directly lock the drive shaft.
Under normal circumstances,
the chance that all three
safety measures fail
at the same time is vanishingly small.
But these weren't normal circumstances.
At 7:05 pm, the third and
final safety system failed,
and the stairs began to plummet.
Fans were flung forward
and started streaming down the escalator.
Some lept over the central
barrier in desperation,
while others were swept
into a crushing pileup.
At the bottom, the landing
became a dangerous choke point.
Under the pressure, the steps twisted
and buckled into jagged metal,
leaving 24 people injured.
Something like this
shouldn't have been possible,
and experts at the time knew
that something had gone wrong,
and they started to suspect foul play.
In the aftermath, Rome's Transit Agency
sealed off the accident site
and closed the Republica
station for several months.
The authorities ordered both a technical
and a criminal investigation,
and the mayor even publicly vowed
to discover the cause of the accident.
So investigators began
dismantling the wreck,
tearing it down piece by piece
to reconstruct what had happened.
The ride people experienced
on that escalator
was one of the most terrifying
rides of their lives.
But maybe it's more similar to the origin
of escalators than you might think.
Like what was the first
escalator even used for?
Do you wanna have a guess?
It was an attraction in a theme park
all the way back in 1896.
It had no steps, a 25 degree incline,
and it was essentially
just a slow conveyor belt
made of metal and wooden parts.
It brought people up a full seven feet
before they would have to walk
downstairs on the other side,
and it was a huge success.
Over 75,000 people enjoyed the attraction
during its two week
stay at the Old Iron Pier
on Coney Island.
The ride was named the Continuous Elevator
and its inventor, Jesse
Reno, had created it
not just as an attraction,
but as a proof of concept,
because he saw it as the
future of transportation.
But as Reno watched
people ride his invention,
he began to notice a pattern.
Nobody walked.
Instead, they stood still,
feet planted firmly sideways
with people gripping the handrail tightly.
Two years later, the department
store Harrods in England
installed a similar device,
but the ride was so
unsettling that Harrods
had to put staff at the
top to offer brandy to men
and smelling salts to women
just to calm their nerves.
You see, for both devices,
the 25 degree conveyor belt
was precarious to walk on
and unnerving to stand on.
At around 12 degrees,
walking on an incline becomes difficult,
and 25 degrees is roughly the limit
that our ankles can flex.
If only there was a way to
replace the conveyor belt
with a moving set of stairs.
Well, then the riders would
always have a flat surface
to stand on and a
staircase they could climb
if they wanted to.
One attempt at a solution
had already been around
for four decades, and it was
called the revolving stairs.
It consisted of a chain
that went around a loop,
then fixed stair shaped
blocks were attached to it,
creating a flat surface to stand
on during the main incline.
But as soon as you'd reached the top,
the steps tilted forward, making
it treacherous to get off,
and a similar problem
plagued you at the bottom.
Now, you might think if the top
and bottom are causing problems,
just extend each landing,
but that also doesn't work.
You just end up with a
jagged mess for longer.
So how do modern escalators
solve this problem?
I mean, have you ever
stopped to think what happens
to the stairs at the top
of the escalator when they disappear?
Clearly, we have steps going
around in some sort of loop,
but how do they actually
behave on the return journey?
What if I give you two options?
Do they stay right side up like the cabins
in a Ferris wheel, or
do they flip upside down
and then flip back
again at the other side?
- I'm gonna go this one all day.
- Ferris wheel.
- This one makes more sense.
- Ferris Wheel.
- Yeah, this one.
- I think they turn upside down.
- And they're actually right side up.
- I think I'm gonna go with this.
- Wow. You're both
- They just keep-
- Yeah.
- The solution to this problem
came from another inventor
named George Wheeler.
His idea forms the basis of
every escalator in use today.
A modern version of it
works something like this.
A typical subway escalator has
an electric motor at the top
with a power output of
around 50 kilowatts.
Smaller than most electric cars.
This motor spins extremely
fast at over a 1,000 RPM,
but it's pretty weak.
So to drive the steps, the escalator needs
to convert this into a slower
output with more force.
To do this, it uses a reduction
gearbox in a gear system,
lowering the output to just a few RPM
and increasing the torque
by a factor of around 100.
The motor is connected
with a large sprocket
to a reinforced steel chain,
which pulls the stairs around a loop.
The so-called step chain
is fitted with wheels
to allow it to roll
smoothly around curves.
But unlike the design
for the revolving stairs,
Wheeler proposed attaching
each step to this chain
through a single axle, giving
it the freedom to rotate.
Next, he added a second
set of wheels to each step
that followed a different track,
allowing him to control the
angle of each step at any point.
On the incline, the two tracks overlap
just like the revolving staircase,
but then at the top,
the two tracks separate,
and this is what allows us
to keep the steps level
throughout the entire ride.
The tracks then remain
separated and curve around.
The steps flip upside down,
tuck into the loop, and
start their return journey.
At the start of the
incline, the tracks rejoin
and the whole process repeats.
- So the answer is, you are both wrong.
- Oh my God.
- I don't want to be interviewed anymore.
- Yeah.
- Wow. I never really thought about that.
- Yeah, like, I would say,
it's like a upside down elevator, bro.
- Guess what? You're right.
- Yeah?
- Yeah.
- But despite all modern escalators
adopting Wheeler's design, at the time,
it caught so little attention
that he was forced to shelve the idea.
It wasn't until eight years
later that another inventor,
Charles Seeberger, bought his patent
and capitalized on the invention.
Seeberger partnered with
the Otis Elevator Company,
and together they built a prototype.
A year later, in 1900,
they showcased it at the
Paris Exposition Universelle.
In total, 51 million people
flocked to the exposition
to see the marvels of modern technology.
But one of the most popular exhibitions
was the world's first
true commercial escalator.
The machine drew huge crowds.
French historian Philippe
Jullian described it
as the jolliest attraction
at the exhibition
and wrote, "The escalator
caused many an incident worthy
"of the vaudeville, separating families,
"sending old men sprawling,
delighting the children,
"and reducing their nannies to despair."
The escalator was even awarded
one of the grand prizes
of the fair.
Shortly after, escalators
started being installed
in different places across the world.
But these escalators weren't perfect.
They had smooth flat stairs,
and when they reached the top,
these stairs would disappear
under a wooden board,
leaving a dangerous gap between them.
Shoe laces, coats, and
especially the long skirts
in fashion at the time easily
got caught in the machinery.
One incident even saw a three year girl
getting her foot pinched in the gap.
And while the girl luckily
escaped with injured toes
and a missing shoe, something
in the design had to change.
To solve this, Seeberger
and Otis installed a
triangular shunt at the end
of the escalator, forcing
rider to go off to the left
before they reached the dangerous gap.
This system worked, but it was awkward
because it meant people
had to put one foot
onto solid ground while
the other was still moving,
which became especially tricky
when some people stood
still and others walked.
So to reduce the risk of people
getting in each other's way,
operators asked people
to stand on the right
and keep the left lane
clear for faster walkers.
It's a convention we still
often follow to this day,
but as it turns out,
there's a much better
solution than the shunt.
Modern escalator steps aren't
smooth, they're grooved.
These grooves then interlock perfectly
with a comb plate at the
top of the escalator.
So now, if a small item
approaches the end,
the comb plate lifts it
up and out of harm's way.
This makes it much harder
for things to get stuck,
and perhaps more importantly,
it allows people to
safely step off forwards.
But the comb plate doesn't
entirely solve the problem.
We still have these gaps on
the side of the escalator
that can pinch and trap
objects as the steps move.
So to address this,
a new safety feature called
the skirt brush was added
to the escalator in 1982.
Escalators are full of subtle
safety features like this,
some old and some new,
but almost all of them are
designed around people.
All the way back in 1896,
Jesse Reno predicted
that riders on his attraction
would need something
to hold onto, so he
introduced a moving handrail.
In a modern escalator, the
motor has a separate connection
to turn a friction wheel
that drives the handrail.
The only problem is that
friction wears things down.
So over time, the wheel gets smaller,
and as its circumference decreases,
each rotation moves the
rubber loop a slightly shorter
distance, so the handrail
begins to move more slowly.
The effect is small, but
it builds up over time.
So to compensate for this,
a new handrail is calibrated
to move around 2% faster than the steps.
You can actually try this yourself.
Next time you're standing on an escalator,
just place your hand next
to you as you stand still,
and you will watch as your
hand slowly drifts forward.
This speed difference stops the handrail
from lagging too far
behind the steps over time.
- Because I have definitely noticed that,
that sometimes I'm on an escalator
and then it's going faster than me.
My hand is going faster than my body,
but that means it's a new escalator.
- Well, it's a new frictional wheel.
That wheel that drives the
hand, we don't replace,
we don't replace the entire escalator.
- Oh, wow, so that's like
a party trick I can use
to entertain my friends.
I mean, I don't know when I'd
have a party on an escalator,
but whatever, if I'm on an
escalator with my friends
and I can see it moving, I'd be like,
"Hey, that's 'cause there's
a new frictional wheel."
I can tell them that and impress them.
- But it's not just the handrail.
The speed of the steps
themselves is also something
that needs to be carefully controlled.
And modern escalators
use AC induction motors,
which are extremely good at regulating
their rotational speed.
And this has an unexpected
benefit on downward escalators.
With enough people riding,
their weight is enough
that the motor no longer
has to power the ride.
Instead, the weight of
the passengers themselves
drives the chain and
causes the motor to spin.
As more people board, the
force on the motor increases,
and it's pushed to turn faster.
But modern AC induction motors work
by creating a rotating magnetic field.
When the motor tries to
spin faster than the field,
electric currents are induced inside it,
which then create their
own magnetic field.
This new field pushes back
in the opposite direction
to the spin, creating a braking force,
which resists the increase in speed.
But something interesting
happens when the motor resists
like this, rather than consuming energy,
the physics of the motor flips
and it uses the excess mechanical energy
to produce an electric current.
This is called regenerative braking,
and it's the same trick
that electric vehicles use
to recharge their batteries.
In effect, the motor
turns into a generator.
The result is that on a busy day,
many modern downward escalators
aren't just moving people,
they're actually generating electricity.
Often this is channeled back
to the building's internal grid
and used to power other devices,
including the upward escalators.
- So even the escalator
that was invented
by George Wheeler
and was installed in 1920,
the Paris Exhibition,
et cetera, I mean, all these
escalators were regenerators.
- What?
- Yeah, when there were people standing
on the escalator in down direction,
these escalators were feeding
energy back into the grid.
- No, it's like the down
escalator's a generator?
- This regenerative braking
makes escalators
extremely power efficient,
but more importantly,
it makes them inherently safe.
But there is a point where
if you keep adding weight,
then eventually the
force becomes so strong
that the motor can no longer resist it.
And if left unchecked,
it would start accelerating
uncontrollably.
The stairs would go plummeting down,
which is exactly what happened in Rome.
After a nearly two year
long investigation,
the investigators published
this 86 page report.
Inside it lists the
exact sequence of events
that led to the disaster.
As fans crowded onto the escalator,
their combined weight increased
the load on the main motor.
The motor tried to resist this change,
but as more and more people funneled on,
the force got too high,
and eventually it hit a tipping point
and the motor started
accelerating uncontrollably.
Safety sensors in the machine
noticed this sudden change
and triggered two things
in short succession.
At first, the power to the motor was cut,
and immediately after that,
the main brake engaged.
Two massive arms clamped down on the drum
to lock it in place and avert a runaway.
This break should have
had enough stopping power
to bring the fully loaded
escalator to a halt,
even under the massive
strain, but it didn't.
Tests after the incident showed
that its braking force was
far too low, around 37%
of the manufacturer's specification.
The weakened brake struggled
to slow the spinning motor
and the escalators downhill
acceleration continued.
This is when the last
line of defense kicked in.
When the escalator speed
rose by more than 20%,
the auxiliary brake triggered
driving steel wedges
into a disc on the drive shaft.
But when investigators
opened up this brake,
they were shocked.
The final mechanical backstop
had been partially disabled.
Someone had physically tied plastic straps
around one of the two brake
wedges and rendered it useless.
(dramatic music)
With half the system unable to engage,
its stopping power was cut by 50%,
just enough for the weight
of all those passengers
to overpower the brake
and render the last
line of defense useless.
Investigators knew that these failures
should have been automatically recorded
in the error logs,
but when they went to
check, they found nothing.
The error codes had been turned off.
Meaning critical malfunctions could occur
without leaving a trace.
The only way this could happen
was if they had been disabled
on purpose, meaning someone
must have reprogrammed
the system to stop recording fault codes.
Next investigators turn to
the maintenance records,
but they found these similarly incomplete
and evidence of major
work on the escalator
was nowhere to be found at all.
With all the main safety
systems compromised
and critical alerts turned off,
the escalator had been
a ticking time bomb.
All findings from the
technical investigation
pointed not to a manufacturing defect,
but to a pattern of neglect
and falsification by those in charge
of keeping the machine safe.
This left the prosecution
with one clear question,
who was responsible?
The trail of evidence led back
to June, 2017 when
maintenance responsibilities
for Rome's escalators shifted
to a new contractor, Metro Roma.
The Transit Authority
ATAC severed its contract
with Metro Roma in an attempt
to wash its hands of the situation.
But as the criminal inquest
continued, it became clear
that the problem went far deeper.
The investigators discovered
that Metro Roma had been
working hand in hand
with the Transit Authority ATAC,
and together they presided
over negligent maintenance
and falsified records
all across the network.
By September 2019, 11 suspects were named
and the courts had suspended
three ATAC managers
along with the chief of Metro Roma.
The prosecution's findings were grave.
In many cases,
safety devices had been
deliberately sabotaged
to avoid escalator shutdowns,
and those in charge had
covered their tracks
through a pattern of
fraud and obstruction.
In the midst of the public outrage,
prosecutors recorded a chilling wiretap
of ATAC Manager Renato Domico.
The translation, "If you run the numbers,
"out of 700 escalators,
there'd be like three
"or four more dropping. Come on."
The prosecutors note in their report
that Domico appeared
uninterested in the possibility
there might have been people
on those three or four escalators.
It was simply a matter of
numbers and percentages to him.
It was a callous remark
and it painted a clear
picture of the incident.
This wasn't an engineering
failure, it was a human one.
But that brings us to a
more fundamental question.
I mean, how safe are escalators really?
The truth is when they're
properly maintained,
the safety margins on
escalators are enormous.
Each system is engineered
to handle forces far beyond
what they'll ever see in service.
- So the breaking load
of our step is like greater
15 kilonewtons to 1.5 tons.
So you can put an elephant on
the step and it won't break.
Well, I've never seen a step
break in my work career.
Never seen a step chain break either.
I mean, it's does not happen.
I mean, I'm not here to say
that there are no accidents
on an escalator, but the accidents I know,
I mean, it's critical like that you,
that you ensure the right maintenance.
That's the most important thing,
because in the end, it's
all about maintenance.
- When this is done right,
the chances of a catastrophic
failure are vanishingly small
and with around 1.5 million
escalators worldwide,
that really is how it should be.
In the US and Canada alone,
over a hundred billion escalator trips
are happening every year,
making the escalator one of
the most widely used forms
of transport on the planet.
On a scale that large, it's sometimes easy
to point the finger at our
technology when things go wrong.
But the truth is,
no matter how well
designed our systems are,
they all rely on people to maintain them.
And perhaps that's the lesson here.
As humans, we have a duty of
care, not just to ourselves,
but to everyone around us.
And sometimes that means
taking responsibility
for keeping each other safe.
(gentle music)
In a way, that's how the
escalators story began
with one person deciding
to take responsibility
for a problem that everyone else ignored.
Back when Jesse Reno was
at university, every day,
he had to climb more than
300 steps to get to his frat house.
But while everyone else
complained about this,
Reno did something about it.
He had the math, the science,
and most importantly, the
problem solving skills
to create the world's
very first escalator,
which he took to Coney Island.
So how do you go from a
frustrating, everyday problem
to an innovation that changes the world?
Well, that's where today's
sponsor, Brilliant, comes in.
Brilliant is a learning app built
around interactive problem solving.
Whether it's electric
circuits, probability,
or even AI, Brilliant's
courses are designed
to help you build intuition,
the kind that helps you
see the world in new ways.
Their unique approach lets
you play with concepts
and build your understanding
from the ground up.
This is actually my favorite
way to learn anything,
getting hands-on with ideas
so that you actually understand them.
Plus, it's been proven to be
up to six times more effective
than watching lecture videos.
They're also releasing new
and updated courses across
math, science, coding, data,
technology, you name it.
So there is always
something new to dive into.
The best part is you can
start learning on Brilliant
for free right now.
Just go to brilliant.org/veritasium.
You can scan this QR code
or click the link that I'll
put down in the description.
Brilliant has also given
our viewers 20% off
an annual premium subscription,
which gives you unlimited daily access
to everything they have to offer.
So I wanna thank Brilliant
for sponsoring this video,
and I wanna thank you for watching.